feat: astro v5.9 blog post (#1587)
withastro/astro.build: src/content/blog/astro-590.mdx

🔒 Batten-down the hatches:

- [**Experimental Content Security Policy support**](#experimental-content-security-policy-support)
- [**Rendering markdown in content loaders**](#rendering-markdown-in-content-loaders)
- [**Disable default styles in experimental responsive images**](#disable-default-styles-in-experimental-responsive-images)

To upgrade an existing project, use the automated `@astrojs/upgrade` CLI tool. Alternatively, upgrade manually by running the upgrade command for your package manager:

```sh
# Recommended:
npx @astrojs/upgrade

# Manual:
npm install astro@latest
pnpm upgrade astro --latest
yarn upgrade astro --latest
```

## Experimental Content Security Policy support

[Cross-site scripting](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Security/Types_of_attacks#cross-site_scripting_xss) (XSS) attacks are some of the most common threats faced by websites. By default, web pages can load whichever scripts and styles they want, from wherever they want. The most powerful defense against XSS attacks is to limit this. A Content Security Policy (CSP) lets you do that, with tools to lock down the page to a list of trusted resources.

> While these are powerful tools, they can be tricky to implement by hand: it's much easier if your framework can do it for you. Astro 5.9 introduces experimental support for CSP out of the box, making it easier to secure your Astro projects. This is Astro's most upvoted feature request so far, and we certainly took our time to implement it. We hope this is worth the wait! 

Reviewer: I think my version is correct there!

> While these are powerful tools, they can be tricky to implement by hand: it's much easier if your framework can do it for you. Astro 5.9 introduces experimental support for CSP out of the box, making it easier to secure your Astro projects. This is Astro's most upvoted feature request so far, and we certainly took our time to implement it. We hope this is worth the wait! 

Author: It's possible I'm wrong :D

> While these are powerful tools, they can be tricky to implement by hand: it's much easier if your framework can do it for you. Astro 5.9 introduces experimental support for CSP out of the box, making it easier to secure your Astro projects. This is Astro's most upvoted feature request so far, and we certainly took our time to implement it. We hope this is worth the wait! 

Reviewer 2: Either one of these works:

> This is Astro's most upvoted feature request so far,

> This is the most upvoted Astro feature request so far,

But it hast to be EXACTLY one of those 😄  -- if you want a "the" in there, then it HAS to be followed by "most upvoted"

I will also accept (for the MOST emphasis possible):

> This is the single most upvoted Astro feature request so far,

We designed the feature to work in all Astro render modes (static pages, dynamic pages and single page applications),
with maximum flexibility and type-safety in mind. You heard that right! You can ditch the unpleasant `unsafe-inline` workaround, use all the Astro features that you like,

> install any adapter, and the feature will work.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
any adapter for any runtime, and add an extra layer of security to your site.
```
Noting that "install any adapter" makes it sound dangerously close to you MUST install an adapter. (Some people will definitely read this as an instruction: "Install any adapter, and the feature will work!" I don't think this is the case (at least, we don't say anything in docs about needing an adapter... so if one is needed, we need to update the docs!)

If it's meant to be one more in a list of "all the ways this works/things you can do", then we should probably emphasize that this continues the list of things you can use.

Also, it does sound a little odd to say, "and the feature will work!" because that's kind of a given? 😅  What about describing a benefit here, something that relates back to being able to ditch `unsafe-inline`?

> ### The solution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### How it works
```

I like this one

where scripts and styles might be injected dynamically during the lifecycle of the application.

The generation of hashes is more complex to implement because it requires knowing the exact content of every script and stylesheet on the page, however it can support more use cases than the `nonce` header. The CSP standard allows hashes to be provided to the browser via the `Response`
header called `Content-Security-Policy`, or using a `<meta>` element called `http-equiv='content-security-policy'`. The value of this header
is the same for both. As you may have guessed, using the `Response` header wouldn't work for Astro, because it would leave out static websites
and SPAs. For this reason, we decided to use the `<meta>` element to provide the CSP to the browser.

Astro will generate the `<meta>` element for you, with all the hashes of the scripts and styles that will be used in the page, *even the ones that will be loaded dynamically*!.

### Usage

First, you have to enable the new experimental flag:

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
import { defineConfig } from "astro/config"

export default defineConfig({
    experimental: {
        csp: true
    }
})
```

> You can now build your project with all the Astro Islands that you want, and they will work out of the box!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> If you use the `Content-Security-Policy` header in your website via middleware or other means, you can still use it, and the browser will use the strictest policy of the header and the `<meta>` element.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you already use the `Content-Security-Policy` header in your website via middleware or other means, you can still use it, and the browser will use the stricter policy of the header and the `<meta>` element.
```

I'll go with "stricter of" rather than "combination of", because the latter implies that it does some kind of merging of them.

Astro 5.8.1 added a new `image.experimentalDefaultStyles` boolean configuration option for applying these default styles. It defaults to `true`, providing the current responsive image behavior. But if you'd rather not fight with Tailwind 4, setting `!important` styles everywhere, you can simply disable this option in your Astro config:

```js
export default {
  image: {
    experimentalDefaultStyles: false,
  },
  experimental: {
    responsiveImages: true,
  },
};
```

For more details, see the [experimental responsive images documentation](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/experimental-flags/responsive-images/#overriding-image-styles).

## Allow adapters to suppress logs about feature support

[Astro adapters](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/adapter-reference/) can [declare whether or not they support certain Astro features](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/adapter-reference/#building-an-adapter), and whether that support is stable or experimental. 

> During builds, Astro will log a warning or error if a site is using features that are not supported by the adapter. However, sometimes an adapter may need to log more specific messages to help users resolve the issue. Previously this could be confusing, as these custom logs were printed in addition to the Astro-generated ones and may appear to contradict them. Astro 5.9 adds an option to allow adapters to suppress the logging for unsupported features.
> 
> To do so, an adapter author can add `suppress: "all"` (to suppress both the default and custom message) or `suppress: "default"` (to only suppress the default one):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
During builds, Astro will log a warning or error if a site is using features that are not supported by the adapter. However, sometimes an adapter may need to log more specific messages to help users resolve the issue. Previously this could be confusing, as these custom logs were printed in addition to the Astro-generated ones and may appear to contradict them.

Astro 5.9 adds an option to allow adapters to suppress the logging for unsupported features. An adapter author can add `suppress: "all"` (to suppress both the default and custom message) or `suppress: "default"` (to only suppress Astro's default message):
```
Whenever we can, starting a paragraph with "Astro x.x" is good for scanning and getting to the new thing!

```ts
setAdapter({
  name: 'my-astro-integration',
  supportedAstroFeatures: {
    staticOutput: "stable",
    hybridOutput: "stable",
    sharpImageService: {
      support: "limited",
      message: "The sharp image service isn't available in the deploy environment, but will be used by prerendered pages on build.",
      suppress: "default",
    },
  }
})
```

> For more details, see [the Adapters API reference](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/adapter-reference/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more details, see [the Adapters API reference](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/adapter-reference/#astro-features).
```
This will take us to a much more relevant section! (We may also introduce a `#suppress` heading directly, which would also be fine. But the above will work no problem.)
